# Pangenomics

## Introduction

The pangenome serves as a tool for exploratory analyses of genome functions and functional relationships. The field of pangenomics compares complete genomes or HQ MAGs. Hereby, the functional enrichment based on environmental conditions and evolutions get calculated and the average nucleotide idendity (ANI) scores between genomes can be computed and visualized.

Pangenomics used to compare the genetic relatedness including the core genome, the accessory genes as well as the singletons. Today Pangenomics compares closely related HQ genomes and clusters genes based on the amino acid (AA) sequence comparison. General Quality information given in pangenomics analysis are singletons, redundancy, completion and, the GC-content. THe initial gene-cluster analysis starts with calculating the similarity of each AA-sequence between each genome, which is the Diamond Blast method (Step 1). Then, weak similarity hits such as incomplete and trunctated genes are being removed (Step 2). After removing those hits, clustering into groups based on Marcov Cluster Algorithm (MCL) follows (Step 3). Linking to the algorithm is a depictins as a dendrogram and rings to organize the pangenome (Step 4). In the Gene-frequency analysis, 3 main genome types are distinguished. The core genome are genes shared between all genomes and are often essential metabolic genes. One gene in the core genome are the single copy core genes. The accessory genome are genes shared by some genomes and they are aquired through environmental adaptation. Unique genes, often referred to as singletons, are genes present only in one genome and mobile genetic elements such as Phages, transposons and CRISPRs.
Single copy core genes (SCG)are essential genes encoded once per genome and shared among all genomes in a dataset. SCGs are utilized for the assessment of MAG purity and contamination, also for the genome completeness and phylogenomics/phylogenetic trees. 
Geometric and funtional homogeneity are used to detect highly conserved or variable regions. Homogeneity is an indicator for evolutionary changes within a genomic region. Geometric homogeneity is based on the configuration of genes within a gene cluster, considers gaps and residues structural configurations. Functional homogeneity on the other hand is based on biochemical properties across genes clusters and considers changes in AA residues which affect the biochemistry of a protein. 